The use of diminutives on social media by females and males
Carlijn Vrieling, S5737486
Length: 3 pages
Abstract
This study delves into the usage of diminu-
tives in the Dutch language on Twitter
between the different genders; male and
female. Diminutives play a big roll in
expressing feelings while communicating.
After exploring related work we hypoth-
esize that females use more diminutives
then males in the Dutch language on Twit-
ter. The results of this study will help
us understand the linguistic variation in
communication between the different gen-
ders on social media platforms. While
our study focuses on Dutch future research
could expand to different languages or dif-
ferent social media platforms.
1 Introduction
The Dutch language has many intriguing aspects,
one of many is the use of diminutives. Diminutives
are used to express the fact that something is small,
often either to show affection or to suggest that
something or someone is not important. In Dutch
diminutives are made by adding the suffix -je, -tje,
-pje, -kje, or, -etje.
One of the many ways people communicate is
through social media. Platforms like Twitter re-
flect the usage of language. That is why in this
study we focus on the use of diminutives on social
media, more specifically the social media platform
Twitter.
The specific research question that this study
will focus on is: What is the difference between
females and males in the usage of diminutives in
Dutch on Twitter?
For this study the independent variable are the
genders, categorized as female and male. The de-
pendent variable for this study is the frequency of
diminutive usage in the Dutch language on Twit-
ter.
Our hypothesis is that there will be a noticeable
difference in the frequency of diminutive usage
between females and males in the Dutch language
on Twitter. More specifically we hypothesize that
females have a higher frequency of diminutive us-
age on Twitter.
For this study we have used a public GitHub
repository. The name of the repository is fi-
nal project diminutives and the account name is
Carlijnvrieling. Vrieling (2024)
Knowing and understanding the use of diminu-
tives in the Dutch language on Twitter contributes
not only to our knowledge of language evolution,
but also helps providing insights into the aspects
of communication between the different genders
specifically on social media.
In the next part we will look at work related to
our study. We will explain how the study will be
conducted; what methods will be used, how the
data will be gathered and analyzed, and how we
came to our conclusions. In the end we will ex-
plain what we discovered and how further research
could implement this.
2 Related Work
Considering this research question is very specific,
there has not been done any research on this ex-
act topic, but there are still papers that are relevant
to this study. Including the usage of diminutives
on social media, this is a topic that has been ex-
plored before. There has been done a study fo-
cusing on diminutives on Instagram for Russian
speakers (Grigoryan1 and Strelchuk, 2020). This
study analyzed over 250 users pages, finding the
most common diminutives and analysing how they
were used. The study found that the way that Rus-
sians use diminutives is not just random, it is a
really important part of how they see the world.
The usage of diminutives is crucial for people to
express themselves online. This research helps us
understand how diminutives are essential in digi-
tal communication and opens the door for further
studies in other languages.
There has also been done some research on the
difference in use of language between the two gen-
ders male and female. Alina Korovatskaya’s work
adds to the ongoing conversation on the difference
between men and women in the way they use lan-
guage. The study looks at how people talk on so-
cial media platforms like Twitter and Reddit and
what the difference is between men and women.
Korovatskaya’s study tries to overcome the limi-
tations of older studies by considering how gen-
der relations have changed in recent years. (Ko-
rovatskaya, 2020)
The study by Dorota Lockyer (2014), delves
into the emotive meanings and functions of
diminutives in posts on Twitter. This study looks
at a Twitter corpus to suggest the non-seriousness
features of the use of diminutives, specifically
diminutives with suffixes -y or -ie(s). Lockyers
study was one of the first to focus on this aspect of
diminutives.
Expanding upon the findings from the previous
studies, our research now looks at how this extends
to the Dutch language on Twitter. We want to find
out how the different genders, male and female, in
the Dutch Twitter community use diminutives and
understand in what way people use language on
this online platform.
3 Data
For our research on the use of diminutives on
dutch twitter, we will use the Dutch Media Col-
lection dataset from Hugging Face (Gupta, 2020).
This dataset contains 10 files with around 271,342
tweets. The tweets are filtered via the official Twit-
ter API to contain tweets in the Dutch language or
by users who have specified their location infor-
mation within Netherlands geographical bound-
aries.
To ensure equal representation we will select an
equal number of tweets from both male and fe-
male Twitter users in the Dutch Social Media Col-
lection dataset. We will use an automated method
to determine user gender, following gender iden-
tification, we’ll collect tweets from both female
and male users from the Dutch Social Media Col-
lection dataset. We will find the diminutives and
then calculate the percentage of diminutives in the
tweets.
All diminutives in the Dutch language end with
-je, so for finding the diminutives we will look for
words ending with -je in the tweets, excluding the
word je, since that translates to you and is thus not
a diminutive.
Our independent variable for this study is the
gender of Twitter users, classified as female or
male, the independent variable is the frequency of
diminutives in Dutch tweets. We will measure the
frequency of diminutives as the percentage of the
amount of diminutives from the total amount of
words in the tweets of a user.
For pre-processing we will tokenize the text by
breaking it into individual words. We will filter out
irrelevant symbols, URLs, and special characters
and we will exclude all retweets.
For determining the gender of the users in the
dataset we will be using the method described in
the research paper ”Gender recognition on Dutch
tweets” (Halteren and Speerstra, 2014). This
study uses an approach that utilizes author by pro-
filing techniques to automatically determine the
gender of Twitter users based on the content of
their tweets. The research paper uses the TwiNL
dataset, but we will be using the Dutch Social Me-
dia Collection dataset since it has more current
data. This method is very accurate, but since it
is automated and since it has to do with gender,
which is difficult to measure automatically, there
will probably be made some mistakes in determin-
ing the gender of the users. That is why this study
is not 100 percent reliable.
4 Predicted Results
We predict that the results of our study will be that
females have a higher frequency of diminutive
usage compared to males. This corresponds to the
findings in Korovatskaya’s study. (Korovatskaya,
2020) The expected results are summarized in
table 1.
frequency of use of diminutives female male
predicted percentage higher lower
Table 1: predicted results
In table 1 you can see how the results will look,
if our hypothesis is correct, females should be a
higher percentage then males, since we hypothe-
size that females use more diminutives then males.
Discussion The predicted results are expected to
provide insights in the use of diminutives. More
broadly it could contribute to our understanding
of linguistic variation on social media and the lin-
guistic variation between the different genders.
5 Conclusion
This study aimed at finding out if females or males
use more diminutives on the social media platform
Twitter. We have predicted results based on previ-
ous studies, which show that females have a higher
use of diminutives then males. Our research adds
to our knowledge of communication on social me-
dia as well as our knowledge about the difference
in the way females and males communicate.
While our study provides important insights,
this study does have its limitations. The re-
liance on automated gender identification tech-
niques may cause some error, which makes the
study not fully reliable. In addition, this current
study is only limited to a specific dataset in the
Dutch language.
For future research it might be interesting to do
this study among different languages, social media
platforms, or in relation with different age groups.
It could also be interesting to find out what the fre-
quency of the use of diminutives is of people that
identify as different genders.
References
Grigoryan1, A. A. and E. N. Strelchuk (2020).
Russian diminutives on the social network in-
stagram. RUDN Journal of Language Studies,
Semiotics and Semantics.
Gupta, A. (2020). Dutch social media collection.
Halteren, H. v. and N. Speerstra (2014, De-
cember). View of gender recognition on
dutch tweets. Computational Linguistics in
the Netherlands Journal 4.
Korovatskaya, A. (2020). GENDERLECTS IN SO-
CIAL MEDIA. masters’s thesis, The City Uni-
versity of New York.
Lockyer, D. (2014, December). The emotive
meanings and functions of english ‘diminutive’
interjections in twitter posts. SKASE Journal of
Theoretical Linguistics.
Vrieling, C. (2024). finalprojectdiminutives.
